# cs451-project

## Vikram Vasan

# Abstract
In this project I will be using movie data to predict movie ratings. I will be using a dataset of 45,000 movies along with characteristics such as genre, director, and cast and the average IMDB rating the movie received. As we are predicting a rating which is a continuous variable (1 to 10), this is a regression problem. I will be using a variety of regression models to predict the ratings and will be comparing their performance. The predictor variables will be the characteristics of the movie and the target variable will be the IMDB rating. Model success will be measured using the mean absolute error between the predicted and actual rating as a proximity score.

# Motivation and Question
The motivation for this project is to explore the relationship between movie characteristics and their ratings. I am interested in understanding how different factors such as genre, director, and cast influence the ratings a movie receives. The question I am trying to answer is: "Can we accurately predict a movie's IMDB rating based on its characteristics?" As a movie enthusiast, I am very interested in understanding what makes a movie successful and how we can use data to predict its success. I believe that this project will not only help me learn more about regression models but also provide valuable insights into the movie industry. The data I will be using can be found [here](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rounakbanik/the-movies-dataset) and contains information about 45,000 movies including their titles, genres, directors, cast, and average IMDB ratings along with metadata like budget and other features. 

# Planned Deliverables
This project will include a few different deliverables including the python packages for the models that I will be using, a Jupyter notebook with code and analysis using the packages to analyze the data, and a report summarizing my findings. I will also include visualizations of the data to help illustrate my points. A "full success" for this project would be to create multiple models that can accurately predict a movie's IMDB rating based on its characteristics and be able to compare and contrast the performance of these models. I would also like to be able to provide insights into which characteristics are most important in predicting a movie's rating and how they interact with each other. A "partial success" would be to create at least one model that can accurately predict a movie's IMDB rating and provide some insights into the data. Regardless of the outcome, the final report will include a summary of my findings and any challenges I faced during the project that may have impacted the success of the project.

# Resources Required
As mentioned above, I have access to a dataset of 45,000 movies and their characteristics that can be found on [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/rounakbanik/the-movies-dataset). Since the data is accounted for, I will not need any more resources. I will be using Python and Jupyter notebooks to analyze the data and create the models. I will also be using libraries such as Pandas, NumPy, and Scikit-learn to help with the analysis and modeling.

# What You Will Learn
I hope to learn about the strengths and weaknesses of different regression models and how they can be used to predict a continuous variable. I also hope to learn more about the movie industry and what factors influence a movie's success. The dream would be to be able to use the learnings from this model as I interact with the movie industry in the future. If I can gain a better sense of what makes good movies, I can use that knowledge when deciding which movies to watch. My improved understanding of regression models will also help me in my future studies and career as I will be able to apply these techniques to other datasets and problems.

# Risk Statement
The biggest risk I see with this project is that the data may not be clean or may not contain enough information to accurately predict a movie's IMDB rating. If the data is not clean, it may lead to a lot of work ahead of time to clean it and prepare it for analysis. If this is the case, I may run out of time to complete all of the analyses that I want to do. Another risk is that the models may not be able to accurately predict a movie's IMDB rating. If this is the case, I will still learn a lot about the process of using regression models and how to analyze data, but I will not be able to provide the insights into the movie industry that I hope to gain from this project. It could be true that there aren't any strong correlations between the characteristics of a movie and its IMDB rating, which would make it difficult to predict the rating. I will be using a variety of regression models to try to mitigate this risk, but it is still a possibility.

# Ethics Statement
If models like this can be proved successful, they could be used my movie studios to help them decide which movies to produce. This could lead to a situation where only certain types of movies are produced, which could limit the diversity of movies available to audiences. This could be problematic as it could lead to a homogenization of the movie industry and a lack of representation for certain groups. The choice to produce a movie is very important for the lives of those involved in the production and the actors, and if this model is used to make those decisions, it could have a significant impact on their lives. Those trying to push the envelope of the movie industry may be discouraged from doing so if they know that their movie will not be produced because it does not fit the mold of what is expected to be successful. This could lead to a lack of innovation in the industry and a decrease in the quality of movies being produced. It is important to consider these ethical implications when using models like this to make decisions about which movies to produce. The goal of this project is to provide insights into the movie industry and how different characteristics influence a movie's success, not to create a model that will be used to make decisions about which movies to produce.

# Tentative Timeline
By the first check-in, I will have completed some preliminary data analysis and have run some basic regression models to get a sense of the data and how it can be used to predict a movie's IMDB rating. To do this, I will have cleaned the data and prepared it for analysis. I might use out-of-the-box models to get a sense for the data in this initial phase before I start to build my own models. By the second check-in, I will have completed a more in-depth analysis of the data and have built multiple regression models to predict a movie's IMDB rating. I will also have started to analyze the results of these models and provide insights into the data, and started to write the final report. This should leave me in a good position to complete the project by the final deadline and be ready for the presentation.